---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Understanding Ceiling Fan Metrics

A number of factors determine a fan’s performance, as well as its suitability to a given application. Some
of the most critical factors are described in the following sections

## Diameter and Rotational Speed
Ceiling fans are available in a wide range of diameters, from very small fans approximately 18 inches in
diameter to very large fans up to 24 feet in diameter. Determining the appropriate fan diameter depends
largely on the dimensions of the space and the application, as discussed in more detail later in this guide.
The California Energy Commission maintains the Modernized Appliance Efficiency Database System
(MAEDbS), which contains a large dataset of information on ceiling fans as well as many other types of
appliances. For context, this dataset shows that the majority of fan models on the market today are
between 4 and 5 ft in diameter, and presumably therefore aimed at the residential market, as illustrated
in Figure 14, below.

All other factors being equal, a larger diameter fan will produce greater airflow through the fan than a
smaller diameter fan at the same rotational speed. Figure 15 below shows a range of example fans of
varying diameters and the range of possible airflows and rotational speeds at which those fans can
operate. In general, higher airflow through the fan generally results in higher average air speeds in the
space. Additionally, larger fan diameters increase the uniformity of air speeds throughout a space. Lastly,
larger diameter fans increase the depth of the boundary layer of air moving along the floor in the
spreading zone outside the fan blades. This figure also highlights the differences between fan models
even if they have the same diameter. Comparing the TypeG and TypeF fans, of equal diameter (8 ft), it is
clear that the range of performance varies by fan type. The TypeG fan has a higher maximum airflow, a
lower minimum airflow, and a higher rotational speed for any particular airflow point.

(Add Figure 14)

For any particular fan, airflow is linear with rotational speed, as Figure 15 also shows. Additionally, the air
speed at any point in the space is also directly linear with fan rotational speed. So, if a point in the room
measures 100 fpm when the fan is rotating at 80 rpm, it will measure approximately 50 fpm at 40 rpm.
This relationship begins to break down at very low air speed, very low rotational speeds, or where the fan
blade height is unusually far from the floor (e.g. > 10 ft).

(Add Figure 15)

## Power and Fan Efficacy
The power consumed by a fan increases in proportion to the cube of its rotational speed, while the
airflow generated by the fan increases linearly with its rotational speed. Thus, fan efficacy - or the airflow
per unit power consumed - decreases as fan speed increases. However, in many fan models, motor
efficiency is poor at lower speeds, partially counteracting this effect. In the MAEDbS dataset, the typical
(median) fan efficacy at the lowest operating speed of each fan is 165 cfm/W, while it is 79 cfm/W at
highest operating speed. Note that the only way to make a direct energy performance comparison
between one fan and another is to compare it under the same conditions - the same diameter and the
same power (or the same airflow). This is because fans with lower-rated maximum airflows will have a
better-rated efficiency even if they consume more power to provide the same airflow. Note that the US
Department of Energy and Energy Star criteria – and the metric that shows up on the Energy Guide label 
calculates the ceiling fan airflow efficacy using an average of the efficiency at different operating speeds,
weighted according to the amount of time the fan is expected to operate at those speeds, including a
standby power loss. This does not account for different maximum and minimum airflows between fans of
the same diameter, so it can be misleading. As before, fans with lower maximum airflow will generally
perform better in this efficiency metric. Figure 16 below highlights the issue, where three fans have the
same 234 CFM/W efficacy, but there is a clear difference in performance between the fans due to the
different range of airflows provided. The fan represented by the curve furthest to the left (least efficient,
lowest maximum airflow) is rated as having the same overall efficacy as the fan furthest to the right (most
efficient, highest maximum airflow).

Fans that can turn down to a low rotational speed and maintain good motor efficiency at that speed can
operate very efficiently under those conditions. There are a number of fans on the market with an
efficacy of over 1000 cfm/W at their lowest operating speed. Other fans typically have a relatively high
minimum speed, and often also have poor motor efficiency at that speed, and these fans benefit less
from speed reduction. Generally, the ability of a fan to operate efficiently at lower speed improves as the
diameter increases, as the Figure 17 below demonstrates.

However, there is considerable variation in performance between models of fans with the same
diameter, as Figure 18 shows. This also demonstrates that there is a wide range of turndown ratios
(minimum speed divided by maximum speed) among different fan models at the same diameter. Some
fans can operate at or below 20% of their maximum rotational speed, while others cannot run below 50%
of their maximum rotational speed. This is also apparent in the MAEDbS data, as shown in Figure 19.

(Add Figure 16 - 19)

## Minimum Efficiency Level for Large Ceiling Fan (new)

## Airflow
Drawing data again from the CEC’s MAEDbS system, Figure 20 below is a random sample of the fans
available in the database. This gives a perspective of the range of fan diameters and associated range of
fan airflows available on the market today. The test methods for rating the airflow of these fans is
federally regulated under 10 CFR 430 Appendix U. For standard fans, the rating is determined by a
modified EnergyStar method, which infers airflow from an anemometer traverse below the fan. For large
diameter fans (above 7ft), the rating is determined by the AMCA 230-15 test method, which infers airflow
from a load cell measurement of fan.

(Add Figure 20)

## Fan Air Speed (modify)
The fan air speed is calculated by dividing the rated airflow of the fan by its diameter. It represents the
average airspeed that passes through the circle swept by the fan blades. Thus, as with rated airflow, fan
air speed varies linearly with fan rotational speed. Fan air speed is a useful metric as it is more directly
representative of the air speeds that will occur in the space. For example, the maximum airspeed at any
location and height in the room will typically be within 1.3 to 1.5 times the fan air speed, and it will occur
below the fan blade tip, slightly inside the fan blade diameter. That applies regardless of fan diameter.
Unlike fan rotational speed, airflow, or power consumption, the concept of fan air speed is also very
useful as it allows designers to directly compare fans with different diameters to one other. Fans with
higher maximum fan air speeds will yield higher maximum air speeds in the room regardless of fan
diameter. For example, Figure 21 shows a sample of fans from MAEDbS. By using the fan air speed as a
metric instead of the rated airflow (see Figure 20), one can directly compare fans to each other even if
the diameter differs substantially. This is useful in cases when the design target is the maximum airspeed
directly underneath the fan.

(On top of original information, make it clearer that you can scale airflow by rpm.)

(Add Figure 21)

## Levels of Speed Control (modify)
Most standard fans typically have a number of fixed fan speed levels. Though some of these fans have a
wide range of speed levels (6 or more), the vast majority of fans have just 3. These are typically standard
fans with AC motors, whereas DC motor fans tend to have more speed levels. Large diameter fans are
typically variable speed regardless of motor type.

The minimum rotational speed on fans with just 3 speed levels is typically still quite high, and often the
minimum speed may generate ~150 fpm seated average directly under the fan, equivalent to over 5 °F
cooling effect. Having a high minimum speed can be problematic in some applications, such where there
are occupants located directly under the fans for extended periods of time (e.g. an office) or when the fan
is used to destratify a space in heating mode. The reason is that the minimum speed may generate too
much of a cooling effect for the occupants when temperatures are mild or cool, and they cannot reduce
the speed further without switching the fan off. In contrast, a high minimum speed is less of a concern in
transiently occupied spaces, spaces where occupants can move freely around. Overall, in most
applications, it is desirable to have more levels of speed control, particularly a minimum level that is slow
enough that it generates low air speeds directly under the fan. A reasonable approximation is that the
minimum fan air speed should be below 0.4 m/s (80 fpm), or a 3 °F cooling effect at the minimum
allowed blade height, depending on the specifics of the application (see Applications section, below).

(Controllability through a wide range of airspeed is important)

(Add Figure 22)

## EPA Tests on Small Ceiling Fan (new)

## IP Rating, Damp Rated, and Wet Rated
For a motor, drive, and controller combination, it may be useful to check the IP (Ingress Protection)
Rating of the fan defined by IEC Standard 60529. The IP rating describes how well an electrical enclosure
keeps water and solids out. A direct drive or gear-driven fan with a higher IP rating means that the fan is
suited to run in harsh environments or conditions, which may be required for the application under
consideration.

Similarly, any ceiling fans in outdoor applications must be rated for outdoor use. UL (Underwriters
Laboratories) provides “Damp Location” and “Wet Location” ratings for electrical products such as
lighting and ceiling fans. Damp rated ceiling fans can be installed in covered locations where they may be
exposed to moisture, but can not be directly exposed to water such as rain or a hose. Wet rated ceiling
fans can be directly exposed to rain, or washed down with a hose.
